.TH wipedisk 1 "2016-10-20" "asmdisks" "ASMdisks User Manual"
.SH NAME
wipedisk \- script to delete 1st MB of a block device and make backup
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B wipedisk -f [-n] <device>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B wipedisk
is a script that zeroes out the first 1 Megabyte (MiB) of a block device and makes a
backup copy to /tmp.
It uses
.B dd(1)
to dump a copy of the first MB to /tmp/
then
.B dd(1) again to zero out the first part of the device.
This helps for reinstalling Linux (wipedisk /dev/sda) or clearing ASM devices.
Note that only the header gets deleted, the rest of the original data are still on the disk.
You may restore accidentally wiped disks by dd'ing the 1st MB back from tmp, i.e.:
dd if=/tmp/backup__dev_<dev> of=/dev/<dev> bs=1M count=1
This may restore your original disk.
.SH WARNING
Needless to say that this command can be very dangerous!
Therefore the -f option is required and a backup of the deleted disk chunk is stored in /tmp.
But a fool with a tool...
.SH OPTIONS
.IP -f
Mandatory [ -f ] option to prevent accidental overwrites
.IP -n
nowait. Skips the 5 second countdown before doing the real work.
.SH FILES
/tmp/backup__*
.SH EXAMPLE
.B wipedisk /dev/sda
.br
Wipes the disk label of the bootdisk (dangerous!). Note that the example is broken. You need to
add the "-f" to make it work.
.SH SEE ALSO
asm(1), dd(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Compiled by Bart Sjerps - contact me via my blog "Dirty Cache" - \fIhttp://bartsjerps.wordpress.com\fR
.br
If you have suggestions for improvements in this tool, please send them
along via the above address.
.SH COPYRIGHT
This software is Open Source and may be distributed "as is", modified, reproduced
and passed to others under the GPLv3 license - \fIhttp://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.txt\fR
.SH DISCLAIMER
This software is provided "as is" and because it is mostly based
on CentOS linux, it follows the licensing and warranty guidelines 
of the GPL. In normal language that means I will not be held 
responsible for any problems you may encounter with this software.
